.TH RADIX 1
.SH NAME
radix \[em] convert numbers between binary, octal, decimal, and hexadecimal
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B radix
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fINUMBER\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
radix converts integers between common numeral systems: binary, octal,
decimal, and hexadecimal.
.PP
Input may be provided as a command-line argument or via standard input
(stdin). When reading from stdin, positional arguments are ignored.
.PP
When input is redirected from a file, each line is processed as a
separate value.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-i BASE
Specify the input base.
.TP
.B \-o BASE
Specify the output base.
.IP
The default base is decimal for both input and output.
.TP
.B \-p
Prepend the output with a base prefix:
.RS
.TP
binary:      0b
.TP
octal:       0o
.TP
hexadecimal: 0x
.RE
.TP
.B \-s
Force signed output. Positive values are unsigned by default.
Negative values are always signed.
.SH BASES
The following values are accepted for BASE:
.RS
.TP
binary:      bin, b, 2
.TP
octal:       oct, o, 8
.TP
decimal:     dec, d, 10
.TP
hexadecimal: hex, h, 16
.RE
.PP
Invalid values result in an error.
.SH BASE AUTODETECTION
radix supports base autodetection using prefixes:
.RS
.TP
.B 0b
binary
.TP
.B 0o
octal
.TP
.B 0x
hexadecimal
.RE
.PP
If a prefix is present, it overrides the \fB\-i\fR option.
Decimal input has no prefix and is assumed by default.
.SH INPUT
A NUMBER may be provided as a positional argument or via stdin.
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
radix \-i bin \-o dec 1010
radix \-o hex 273
echo 42 | radix \-o bin
radix \-o hex < file.txt
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Invalid option
.TP
.B 2
Invalid option argument
.TP
.B 3
Invalid prefix
.TP
.B 4
Invalid input
.SH LIMITATIONS
radix supports up to 64-bit (unsigned) integers.
.PP
Maximum values:
.RS
.TP
binary:      1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111
.TP
octal:       01777777777777777777777
.TP
decimal:     18446744073709551615
.TP
hexadecimal: FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
.RE
.PP
Values exceeding these limits are clamped to the maximum value.
.PP
Negative values are supported. The sign is removed before conversion
and reapplied to the result.
.SH NOTES
When passing a negative value as a command-line argument, use \(oq\-\-\(cq to
terminate option parsing:
.RS
.nf
radix \-o bin \-\- \-42
.fi
.RE
.PP
This is not required when using stdin.
.SH BUGS
Values beginning with \(oq0b\(cq are always interpreted as binary. This may
conflict with valid hexadecimal representations. Prefix hexadecimal
values explicitly with \(oq0x\(cq to avoid ambiguity.
